cloud computing:

    it is practice of using network of remote server on internet to store, process, and compute data rather 
    than using local maching.

    evolution :
        first there was single physical machine serving single app
        then vm maching with hypervisor running app on each vm's on single server
        then containers comes which run on vm using docker deamon without depending on underlying
        hardware
        then functions running in each container and this function executed when it is required no need to maintained code
        just deploy function pay for its execution like lambda

    types:

        1) SAAS: software as service.
            here organization provide complete software so we dont have to maintained any server
            company take care of maintainance of underlying machines

            you just use this software which remain available for 24/7
            ex. microsoft 365, salesforce

        2) PAAS: platform as service
            here organization provide you platform for deploying and maintaining you software or application
            it takes care of underlying server.

            dont worring about provisioning , configuring, maintainance of underlying hardware

            ex. heroku.

        3) IAAS: Infrastructure as service
            here organization provides you actual hardware where you can deploy and maintained your application
            here you take care of you underlying hardware infrastructure.
            ex. you buy server, databases and maintained it.

            you dont worry about it staff, datacenter and hardware

            ex. aws, azure, google cloud, oracle


    cloud deployment model:

        public cloud : this is cloud or remote service proveded by 3rd party paticularlly
        infrastructure service prodvider. it is also call cloud-native

        companies which are starting out today, small companies, startups,
        are using public cloud


        private cloud : this cloud is deployed on organization datacenter. usually done using
        openstack. it is also called on premise cloud

        organization which are old have strict policy of security compliances.
        ex. government, strict data sensitive org hospitals,



        hybrid cloud : here both public cloud and private cloud is used. communicate with each other using
        vpn

        established organization which are moving some part to public cloud. they can't mover all to public cloud
        due to complexity or some security compliances

        ex. banks, fintect, investment management


        cross cloud : here multiple cloud service provider used and they may be and may not be communicate with each other using
        azure arc, google anthos or they might be use independantly


    AWS : create account - root user = with email  - have account id and account alias
    IAM:
        account id is of 12 digit
        create user with access to specific service
        can have access key and secret key as well as password

        for IAM user login - account id or alias of root user, iam user name , password
        after login right corner we can se username@accoutalias


    AWS Budget:
        create budget with specific amount so it will notifed you how if it goes above threshold
        it also show forcasted , usd budget,
        down service like ec2 if budget goes above threshold

        freet tier :
            in billing preference : we can set up email to notified if you go above free tier

        cloud watch alarm:
            you can also set alarm with billing metric to notifed to if it goes aboe thresold
            here you need to setup sns topic and confirm your email id

            it also gives you anomally detection, down services if it goes above threshold like ec2


    Innovation Waves or k-wavers (kondratiev):
        it hypotheized cycle like phenomena in global world economy
        phenomena is closely connected with technological life cycle

        for ex. in 90 there is wave of information technology 20 there is wave of cloud

        each cycle consist PRDE: prosperity, recession, depression, expansion


    burning platform:
        burning platform is used when organization move from old technology to new one with
        with uncertainty of success and can be fear that organization future survival depends on
        its digital tranformation



    computing power:

        it metric which measure at what speed computer perform its computational task


        cpu = intel xeon cpu - used in aws elastic
        gpu = aws inferentiare chip  - which 50 times faster than cpu
        quantum computing = aws bracket -Rigetti 16Q apsen4  100 million times faster



benefits of Cloud:
    why organization will use cloud or migrate to cloud

    1) agility:
        increase speed and agility

    2) pay as you go pricing
        pay as your uses instead of paying fix amount

    3) High availibility

    4) security

    5) high scalability

    6) high reliability
        stop spending money on managing and maintaining data centers

    7) fault tolerance

    8) disaster recorvery

    9) elasticity


six advantage of cloud (aws referenc doc):

    1) pay as you go pricing:
        instead of paying fix price. you pay for what you consume on time basis.

    2) benefits from massive economies of scale:
        you are sharing resources with other customers to get unbeatable savings


    3) stop guessing capacity (high scalability):
        scale up or down to meet current need. launch or destory server with one click


    4) agility :
        launch resources with few clicks in minutes instead of waiting days for it team to build resource on -primeses

    5) high reliability :
        stop spending money on managing and maintaining data centers

    6) high availabiltiy:
        go global in minutes. deploy you app in multiple region with in few clicks

    7) security:
        aws comes with default server security


Aws Global Infrastructure:

    aws global infrastructure is globally distributed hardware and datacenters that are
    physically connected together to act as single resource for end customers

    aws global infrastructure is made up of following resources:

    25 launch region  --- are distrinct location which consist one or more availibility zones. 
    every region is independant of other region interms of powe supply, location, water. each region has 3 availibility zones
    new service always become accessible in us-east-1 region which is first region of aws (2006). not all aws services are available in all regions. billing info is appears in us-east-1 region.
    cost of services are vary as per region

    81 availibility zones -- are physical location that made up of one or more datacenter. datacenter is building whcih thousands of 
    computers. each region containe 2 or 3 availibility zone.
    data cenrters in region are isolated from each other (in different building). 
    but they are close enough to provide low latency < 10ms. it is common practice to run workload in 3 availibility zones
    to ensure services remain available even if 1 or 2 datacenters failed (high availibility)

    availibility zones are represented by region code followed by letter identifier
    ex. us-east-1a
    subnet is associated with AZ and you don't choose AZ directly . you choose subnet which associated with AZ.

    108 direct connection location
    275+ point of presence
    14 local zones
    17 wavelength zones



    AWS Global Network:
        AWS global netword is interconnection between aws global infrastructure.
        it is expressway where data moves very fast beetwen aws datacenters all. data is encrypted.

        Edge locations act as on and off ramps to aws global network.

        servivces uses edge locations as On ramps:

        AWS global accelerator and AWS s3 transfer accelaration:
            uses edge locations as on ramps to quickly reaches aws resources in other region
            traversing fast global aws netword.


        services uses edge locations as off ramps:
        AWS cloudfornt cdn:
            it uses edge location as off ramps, to provide at edge storage and
            compute at end user


        VPC endpoints:
            ensure resources stay withn aws netword and not access through public network
            to give fastes network.


    AWS POP pont of presense:
        aws point of presense is intermediate location between aws region and end users.
        this coud be a data centers and collection of hardware.

        aws point of present is datacenters owned by aws or trusted third partner.
        this point of presence used by aws services for content delivery or expadiated upload.

        pop resources are edge location and regional edge caches.


        edge location are data centers that hold cached of most popular data, file, pages
        to reduced the delivery of distance to end users.

        regional edge caches are data centers that hold large cache of less popular data, file, pages.
        to avoid the full round trip and reduces transfer fee.


        following aws services uses pop.

        aws cloudfront: it is content delivary networdk. you point you websites to clodufront. 
        it allowed you to choose origin that will
        source cache. cached then content what origin will retruned to different edge locations in the world


        aws s3 transfer accelaration: it allow you to generate special url which end user 
        can used to upload file to nearest edge location.
        then file can tranfer to s3 through aws network much faster.


        aws global accelerator : that can find optimal path from end user to your web servers. 
        aws global accelerator are deployed with in
        edge location so user traffic are goes through edge location insted of directly to web server.

        this mostly use if you server is deployed in one region . user traffics are coming from other region.


    AWS Direct Connection Location:

        aws direct connection is dedicated or private connection between you aws cloud and office, datacenter, co-location

        Direct connect has two very fast connection options:
        1) low bandwidth :  50mbps to 500mbps
        2) high bandwidth:  1gbps to 10gbps

        it helps reduce network costs and increase bandwidth throuput. normally used for high traffic networks
        it provide reliable and secure connection . most consistent network than convential internet base connection



    local zones:
        local zones are data centers that located in densly populated area to give very low latency performance.
        usually 7ms

        los angeles, california is first local zone deplyed by aws.
        it is logical extension of us-west region

        identifier for local zone is as follows:
        us-west-2-lax-1a

        you want use local zone you need to opt in . submit ticket for that

        there specific service where local zone are available, ec2, ebs, vpc

        purpose of local zones to support high demanding latency sensitive application.


    wavelength zones:
        wavelength zones allow edge computing on 5g networks
        bascally aws vm and user are communication though ultra low latency 5g networks
        aws is partner with 5g network provider telecom partner to utilize their 5g network.



Data Residency:

    it is physical or geographical location where organization or cloud resources is resides.

    complaince boundries:

        it is complaince rule given by organization or goverment which regulates where cloud or organization
        data will reside


    data soverignity:
        it legal rules asserted over data because it physically location comes under that
        jurisdication control


    to allow data residency on resource in aws you can

    aws config:  it is use to create configuration rule which continuesly check aws resources and alert if it deviates from
                 given config.

    aws outposts:  it is physical rack of servers that you can put in data centers.
                   your data will resides wherever outposts will reside.
                   it is comes in 3 form : 42u, 2u, 1u

    iam policies: you can create iam policies for different user's to restrict access to other servcies 
                  which not assigned by iam policies.



AWS Ground Station:

    it aws fully manage service that let's you control sattelite communication , gathered , 
    process data and scale you operation without having to
    worried about managing and building your own ground station.

    ground station is used for

    weather foracasting
    video broadcasting
    sattelite communication
    surface imaging


    To use ground station:
    you set up contact about (select location, set up satelite, start time, end time, ground location)
    use aws ground station aws ami to launch ec2 instance and uplinked and downlinked data during contact or
    store downlinked data in aws s3 bucket.


ARN : Amazon Resource Name

    ARN is amazon resource name that unquely identify each aws resources.

    arn format

    arn: partition : service: region id : account id: resourceid : resource type


    partition is aws cloud type:
        aws - aws global
        aws-cn - aws china region
        aws-gov-cloud = aws gov cloud


AWS Cloudshell:
    it shell command line in build in aws console. you can access this shell on browser usin aws console.
    in shell you can interact different aws service using aws cli.
    it is free service.

    preinstalled tools
        aws cli, git, python, node, vim, sudo, pip, npm, tar,
        wget, zip and many more


    storage:
        1gb of storage free per region

    save files and settings
        files saved in home directory available for next session
        in same region


IaC Infrastructure As Code:

    in iac you write code or configuration to create, manage, update and destroy infrastructure or services required for you application to run
    iac is blueprint of you infrastructure
    it allow you to store, version, inventory you infrastructure.

    ex. terraform , aws cloudformation template, aws cloud development kit

    aws cloudformation template:
        it is declaritive iac tool
        it is explicit. what you write is what you get.
        no unusual creation of services or behaviour.
        you write script in yaml, xml, json form.

    aws cloud development kit (cdk):
        it is imperative iac tool
        it implicit. you say what you want , rest will be filled in.
        there is chances of misconfiguration
        it does more than imprative.
        you write script in programming language such as python, node, ruby


Shared Responsibility Model:

    SRM is cloud security framework that defines the security obligations of customer versa cloud
    service provider.

    Aws Take of following security:
    aws is responsible for security of the cloud

    Hardware, global infrastructure:
    1) launch region 2) avalibility zones 3) direct connection location 4) edge location

    software:
    1) compute 2) storage 3)database 4)networking



    customer take of on following security:
    customer is responsible for security in the cloud

    configuration of managed service or third party software
    1) platforms 2)application 3) identity access management (IAM)

    configuration of virtual infrastrucutre and system
    1) os 2)networking 3)firewall

    security or configurations of data
    1) client side encryption 2) server side encryption 3) networkin traffic protection
    3) customer data



    Shared Resposibility Architechture:

    1) Virtul machine : independent machine on share physical server done using software. EC2, lightsail

    2) Containers: it isolated block on os which can used to deployed multiple app. ECS, ECS fargate, EKS

    3) Serverless: here code or function is directly deployed. Lambda



HPC High performance computing services:

    cluster of hundreds and thousands of servers with fast connection between them with purpose of boosting computing capacity.

    Aws Parallel Cluster : it is open source cluster management tool that makes it easty to deploy and manage high performance cluster
    on AWS.

    nitro system : it is dedicated hardware and lightwight hypervisor that enabled faster innovation and enhanced security.
    it is used by all new ec2 instances types.

    Nitro Cards -- specialized card for vpc, ebs, instance storage and controller card
    Nitro security chips: it is integrated to motherboard to provide security to hardware.
    Nitro hypervisor -- lightweight hypervisor cpu and memory allocation bare metal like performance.

    bare metal instances : you can ec2 instance without hypervisor so that you can run workload directly on hardware for
    maximum performance and control. ec2 instance M5 and R5 run as bare metal instance



Edge And Hybrid Computing:

    Edge Computing : when you push you workloads outside of your network to run close to destination location.
    ex. pushing workload to iot devices, phones, external servers not within your cloud network.

    Hybrid Computing: when you can run your workloads on both on premise data center as well as aws virtual private cloud.


    Aws outposts : it is physical rack of server's that you put into your data centers. 
    it is allow you to use aws api and services such as ec2.

    AWS wavelength : it allow you to build and launch you application in telecom datacenter. 
    by doing this your application will have ultra low latency as they will
    use 5g network and be closest as possible to end-user.


    AWS localzone  : it aws data center located outside aws region so that you can use aws closer to end destination

    vmware cloud on aws : allow you to manage on premise virtual machine using vmware as ec3 instance. 
    date center must be using vmware for virtualization


types of storage services:

    EBS : elastic block storage:
        data is stored or split into block of fixed size
        operting system can directly access data
        supports only single write volume.
        it virtual hard drive attached vm.


    EFS : elastic file storage:
        it store file and its metadata
        file can transfer using file transfer protocals
        multiple read and single write can be perform on file.


    aws s3: simple storage service:
        it store object, metadata and unique id
        multiple read and multiple write can be perform on object.
        scales with no file limit or storage limit

        when you just want to upload file and not have to worry about underlying infrastructure.
        not suitable high iop/sec

        it store data in object architecture.
        each object have key, value which actual object, version id, metadata
        it has no limit on storage
        s3 bucket is created in global namespace so should have unique name

        each file in bucket can be of 0 bytes to 5 terabyte size.


        aws offers different s3 storage classes that trade retrival time, accessibility, availibility and durability
        as go cheaper.

        s3 standard (default):
            fast, 99.99% availibility, 11 9's durability. replicated across 3 availiblity zones.

        s3 intelligent tiering:
            use ml to move object across different class as per there uses.without any performance impact or added overhead.

        s3 standard - IA:
            still fast, cheaper if file access is less than once a month. additional retrival cost is applied.
            99.9% availability

        s3 one zone - IA:
            still faster. replicated in only one AZ. 99.5% availibility, chepaer than standard-IA. 20% reduced durability.
            data can get destroyed.retrieval fee is applied.

        s3 glacier:
            it is long term cold storage for historical data. retrieval can take minutes to hours. it very cheap storage.

        s3 glacier deep archive:
            it is lowest cost storage class. retrieval takes 12 hours.


    AWS Snow Family:
        snow family is group of storage and compute devices that move data physically in and out of cloud
        data is thrnsfer over internet and private connection is too slow, difficult coslty

        snowcone: comes in two sizes : 1) 8TB storage (HDD) 2) 14TB storag (SSD)

        snowball edge : comes in two types: 1) storage optimized: 80 TB  2)compute optimized: 39.5 TB

        snow mobile: 100 PB storage

Database
Data WareHouse:

    it is relational data that is used for handling analytic workloads.
    it is store data as relational table.

    company will have terabytes of relational and they need analytics or some meaning full data from it

    it generally used to perform aggragation. it is generally designed to hot. it perform query on large data very fast.

    it is used for infrequent access. they are not used for real time reporting

    data from relation database is stored in data warehouse after prefroming some tranform in ETL cycle.

    aws redshift is petabyte size data warehouse.


No SQL Database Service:

    DynamoDB : it serverless no sql key/val and document database. 
    it designed to scales to billion of records with gauranteed consistent.
    data return at least a second. you dont have to worry about managing shard. it is very fast, scales well. 
    it is flagship database service
    of amazon


    DocumentDB: it is no sql document database which is compatible with mongoDB. 
    mongoDB very popular open source no sql database among devloper.
    when you want mongodb you can use documenntDBFF

    Amazon KeySpace : it is fully managed apache cassandra database. 
    cassandra is open source no sql key/value database like dynamodb but dynamodb can
    also store document have more functionality. when you wan apache cassandra key/value data base

Relation Databas Service:

    AWS RDS - RDS is relation data base service that supports different types of sql engines. it is most popular database used by
    companies and start up

    SQL's:
    1) Mysql : most popular relation database which not owned  and licence by oracle.
    2) mariaDB: it forked from mysql which owned by oracle. it open source.
    3) psql : postgresql is also popular relation datbase and have additional features than mysql but comes with complexity.
    4) oracle : it is relational database licence by oracle
    5) microsoft sql server: it is relation database licence by microsoft
    6) Aurora: fully manged relational database of either mysql 5x fast or psql 3xfaster.
                when you want highly available,durable, scalable, secure database of mysql and psql.
       Aurora Serverless: it is serverless on demand version of aurora. when you want most of benefits of aurora but 
       can trade of cold starts.
       or you dont have lots of traffic.

    7) RDS on VMWARE: it allow you to deploy rds engine to on-premise data center uses vmware for virtualization.


Cloud native networking Services:


    Aws Account
        region
            vpc -- virtual private logically isolated section of cloud where you launch your resources
              AZ - Availibility zone
                public subnet -  logical partition of ip network into multiple smaller network segment          NACL - act as firewall at subnet level   Route Table:                             internet gatway - enable access to net
                     security groups - security group act as firewall at instance level                                                                   determine where your network traffic from subnet directed
                        ec2 instance
                private subnet -
                    RDS DB


    VPC and subnet:
        vpc : it logically isolated section of aws cloud where you launch aws resource . it has range ip using CIDR range
        CIDR range of ip address = 10.0.0.0/16 = 65536 ip address

        subnet - it logical parttion of ip network into mutiple small segment. it has smaller CIDR range than vpc
        CIDR range of ip address = 10.0.0.0/24 = 256 ip address

        public subnet - it is range ip which can reach by public internet
        private subnet - it is range of ip which is private not reachable by public net


    security gorups vs nacl

    nacl  = it network access control list. it is act as firewall at subnet level
            it support allow/deny rule
            here you can block ip which is abusing application

    security groups - it acts firewall at instance level.
                      implicitly denies all traffic. you can create only allow rule.
                      allowing ssh access on port 22 for ec2. you can not block single ip here


EC2 instance Families:

    ec2 intances are divided into different families based on combination cpu, memory, networking capacity.

    general purpose:
        balance of compute, memory. networking resources.
        A1, T2, T3, T4, M4, M5, Mac

    compute optimized:
        used for larged workload or cpu intensive task, high performance server. gaming , ad server
        c5, c4, cbn, c6g eetc

    memory optimized:
        fast performance for workload that process large data sets in memory.
        R4, R5, X1, high memory, z1d
        use cases in memory cache, in memory databases, big data analytics

    Accelerated optimized:
        hardware accelartores, or co-processors.
        p2, p3, p4, G3, G4ad
        use cases in machine learning, compute finanance, speech recognition

    storage optimized:
        high performance read write access to very large data sets on local storage.
        D2 D3, I3, H1
        uses cases in no sql , data warehouse, transactional databases


    ec2 instance type is combination instance size and family

    instance type:
        nano, micro, small, medium, large, 2xlarge, 4xlarge, 8xlarge, 9xlarge, 16xlarge


    Pricing:
        on-demand - it charge as you used.  or pay as you go model.
                    it default model applied when you create instance.
                    it charge for per second or per-hour

                    it suiteable for unpredectable, spikey workload for exprerimenting app traffic.

        Reserved: Designed for application for steady state, predicatable usage and reserved capacity.
                  Reduced Pricing is based on Term * class offering * RI attributes * payement option
                  Term =  longer the term greater the saveing. contract of using 1 or 3 year.
                          reserved instance do not removed automatically.
                          when expired it will changed to on-demand

                  class = less flexible class the greater the savings
                          standard :  up to 75% reduced cost compared to on-demand
                                      cant change RI attribute.
                          convertible - up to 50% reduced cost compared to on-demand
                                        can exchange RI on RI attribute it its less or equal value.

                  payement option - greater the upfront the greater the savings
                            all upfront - make all payment in advance.
                            partial upfront - half cost paid in advance other half is paid hourly discounted rate.
                            NO Upfront - no advanced payment. payment is done hourly discounted rate.


                  RI Attributes: 4 RI Attribute
                            1) Instance Type : M4large, T2micro, T1medium, T3micro
                            2) Region : Region is which reserved instance purchased.
                            3) Teanancy: where you instance run on shared or single tenant hardware.
                            4) platform : operating system.


                 Limit:  you can puchased 20 regional RI per region and 20 zonal RI per az.
                         you can not excced on-demand instance limit by running regional RI. limit 20

        spot : aws offer there remaining vacant compute capacity.
                it 90%  discount as compared to on-demand instance.
                it can be get terminated or started in between.
                suitable for app have flexible start time and end time and app which
                are low compute requirement.

        dedicated instances - it is physical instance will remained same. run on same hardware.
                             single tenant hardware.


    savings plan : plan offered same discount as RI but simplifies purchase process.
                   there are 3 types of savings plan.
                   1) Compute Savings Plan. : provide most flexibility and reduced cost up to 66%.
                   automatically applied to ec2, fargate, lambda.
                   2) EC2 instance savings plan: provide lowest price. saving up to 72% in exchange of commitment to
                    used individual instance family in region.
                   3) sage maker saving plan.: reduce sagemaker cost by 64%. automatically apply to sagemaker 
                   usage regardless off size, region, family, component.


    zero trust model:
        it is secruity model which provide access based trust no one and verify everythin.
        in tradition security, malicious actor being able to by-pass access control which demonstrates it is not sufficient
        no trust model is primary security parmeter which is first line of defence to protect cloud services and its assets.

        network centric: trdaditional security model uses vpn and firewall to control access to resource 
        as there less workstation outside of office.

        identiy centric: zero trust model uses identitiy based authentication and authorization to 
        provide access to resources based on where when, who is wants to access resources

        identity centric is another level over network centric and it is not replacement.


        we can implement identiy security control in aws usin IAM  service:

        IAM service:
            define iam policies
            permission boundries
            service control policies (organization wide policies)
            IAM policies condition:
                aws.SourcIp: restrict based on ip
                aws.RequestRegion : restrict based on request region
                aws.MultiFactorAuthPresent: restrict if multi factor auth is present or not
                aws.CurrentTime: resrtrict based on time of the day

        aws does not have ready to use identity security control. thus 
        aws considered to not have zero trust offering for customers and
        thrid party services need to be used.

        collection of aws service can be used to setup intelligent identity security control but required expert knowledge.

        aws cloudtrail : is used to track all api calls
        aws guardduty: it detect malicious activity based on cloud trail and other logs
        aws detective: it takes output of aws guardduty, analyzed, invasitgate, quikley detect identity security issues.


        third party service:
            like azure active directory have real time risk detection based on more data points than aws.
            source ip
            time of day
            mfa
            device and application
            what is being access
            verifications and logic controls is more robust

            azure active direcotry
            google beyond corp
            jumplcloud

            you can use third party services used aws single sign on to access aws resources.


    Directory Service:
        Directory service maps name of network resources to their network address.
        directory services is shared infrastructure information which used to mange, adminstrator,
        organized resources on network:
        1) volumes
        2) machines
        3) printer
        3) files
        4) folder
        5) users,groups, device and telephone number

        it is important part of network operating system. directory server is server which provides
        directory service.

        1) DNS : domain name service
        2) azure active directory service
        3) Apache directory service
        4) oracle directory service (OID)

        microsoft introduced activity directory domain services in window2000 to allow organization to manage
        on prima mutple component and system by giving single identity per user or singel sign on


    IDP identity provider:
        identity provider provide indentity information for user to authenticate to multiple application which
        supports that identity provider
        facebook, linkedin, twiiter,amazon

        openid: it is standard decentrlized authentication protocal. it gives identity of user to application server. who you are
        oauth2: it is standard protocal for authentication and authorization it does not share password but share oauth2 token to access resources.
        saml (security assertion markup language): it used to exchange authentication and authorization information between
        idp and service provider


    LDAP (lightweight directory access protocall):
        it used for accessing and maintaining distributed directory information services over internet protocal

        LDAP is used to store users username and passwords.

        LDAP is used for same sign on - in same sign on user can use same user and password but they have to enter it every time
        when they want to login.


    MFA : (Multi Factor Authentication):

        MFA : in mfa you have to use more than 1 factor to authenticate to application or platform
        first factor you to username and password to loggin and after that in 2nd factor you have to use
        other device such as phone to confirm that its you have logging in

        MFA authentication protects if you first factor get comporimized passowrd.

        mfa its provide all clouds and other application such facebook, insta, twiter

    AWS IAM (Identity And Access management serviece)
        IAM is used for creating and managing aws users, groups, and roles and assigning permission
        to them to used different aws resources

        IAM policy: it is json document which grants permission to used different aws resources.
                    IAM policy is attached to IAM identities

        IAM permission : it action which user can perform on different aws services.
                        it is defined in IAM policy

        IAM identies:
            IAM user : it is individual user which logged into aws console via ui or programmatical
                    access services

            IAM group : user's of same king is group under one name so every user will have same permission
                        like develop, admin

            IAM role : we can create role and assigned specific permission (action) in iam policy to role 
            and then assigned to resources.


    POLP(principle of least priviledge):
        it is security concept which provide least amount of permission to perform task


        JEA : just enough access is provide exact action or permission to perform task

        JIT : just in time is provide permission or action to perform task for short duration time


        risk based adaptive polices: each attempt to resource is anlayzed and risk score is 
        caluclated how likely resource get compromized from source.
        risk score could be based on many factors.


    AWS Account root user and user:
        AWS acounnt : which holds all aws resources
        AWS root user : it is special user which have full access to resources.
                        root user can not be deleted
                        root user access can not be restricted by iam policies
                        root user access key should not be generated
                        root user should have multi factor authentication
                        root user used only for administrative task
                        changing account settings
                        delete aws account
                        changing or canceling aws support plan
        aws user: it normal user which perform specific task that it has permission or access.


    AWS Control Tower:
        aws control tower help enterprises to quickly setup secure, aws multi account
        provide you baseline environment to get started with multi account architecture.

        aws landing zone:
            provide baseline envionment to start launching production ready workloads.
            sso enabled, centralized aws cloud trailing, cross account secrity auditing

        account factory:
            automates creation new aws account

        guardtrials:
            pre packaged governance rule for security, operation, complaince that customers can
            select and apply enter prises wides or to specific groups of accounts.


    AWS Config:

        change management : it is formal process: 1) to enforce, monitor, remediate changes

        compliance-as-code: when we use programing to enforce, monitor and remidate changes as per compliance rule 
        or configuration

        aws config: it compliance as code framwork that allow us to manage change in our aws account per region basis.

    AWS Quick Starts:

        aws quick start are prebuild templates create by aws and aws partners that help you to deploy wide range of stacks

        aws quick starts have 3 main parts:

            1) reference architecture of deployement
            2) cloudformation templates stack that automate and configure deployment
            3) deployment guides explaining architecture and configuration detail.


    Provisioning Services:

        provisoning : it is alocation and creation of resources or aws services for customer.


        AWS EB : it platform-as service. it used for automating deployment of web application like heroku.
                 it uses cloudformation template underlying. it not recommended for production. 
                 you choose language and pushed you code.
                 all underlying infrasturcture creation handle by elasticbeanstalk
                 create following services:
                  elastic load balancer
                  ec2 instances.
                  db instances.
                  logging services cloudwatch sns
                  security groups.

        AWS cloudfroamtion template. it infrasturce as code service where you write template in json or xml 
                                     for creating and managing or scaling aws resources.

        aws quickstart: bre build cloudformation template stack for deployment of wide range of architecture.

    AI and ML:

        Artifical intelligence is nothing but machines with brain

        machine learning : we feed experimental data to machine to learn so that they can predict future data points.

        deep learning : is machine with complex neural network which mimic human brain to solve complex problem

        aws sagemaker : it is ml framework used to build, delpoy, managed machine learning model.
                    pytorch on aws is opensource ml framework
                    tensorflow on aws is open source ml library
                    apach2mxnet on aws open source ml framework

        aws sagemake ground truth - is data labeling service. have human label dataset to train ml model

        aws augmented AI : human intervention review service. whin ml model make prediction it is not sure about result
        answer queue up for human review.

        AWS transcribe
        AWS polly
        AWS Lex : bot

    Big Data and Analytic Services:

        big data massive amount of unstructured and structured data that is difficult to move and process using 
        tradition databases softwares.

        aws athena : it is serverless sql query service. it can json, csv files 
        from s3 bucket load them in temprorary table so that you query them using sql
        aws elasticsearch: elasticsearch clster.
        aws cloudsearch :  full text search service
        aws elastic map reduce: it is used to transform unstructure data to structure data on fly. here you can spark.
        aws manged kafka service msk: kafka streams and services.
        aws redshift : flagship data warehouse. fast query.


    amazon quicksight : it BI (business intelligence) dashboard that allow you to ingest data from various amazon storage and 
                        database service to quickly visualize buisness data with minimal programming knowledge.

                        it uses SPICE to achieve blazing fast performance at scal
                        super fast
                        parallel
                        in memory
                        calculation
                        engine



    AWS well Architect Framework:
        it whitepaper defined by aws to help customer to build their application architecture using best practices defined by aws.

        framework : general defination , general design principle, review process

        framework is divided into 5 pillars or sections which address different aspects that can be applied to cloud architecture

        1) operational excellance : run and monitor system/application
        2) security : protect data and application, mitigate risk
        3) reliability: mitigate and recover from disruption / failure
        4) performance: use computing resources efficativly
        5) cost optimization: get the lowest price.


        general designed principle:

        1) stop guessing you capacity needs
        2) test application at production scale: clone production env test it. delete it if not in use
        3) automate to make architecture experimentation easier: use cloudformation template or infrastruture as code tool
        4) allow for evolutionary architecture: use cicd, rapid releases, version upgradtions
        5) drive architecture using data : use logging tool to collect data and update mistake
        6) imporve through game days : simulate traffic through production. kill ec2 instance to check test recovery

        5 pillars:
        1) operational excellance: perform operations as code. us IAAS to provision, manage, scale your operation or infrastructure.
                                   deploy frequent small, reversible changes.
                                   refine operations and procedures frequently: look for continous improvement.
                                   anticipate failure.
                                   learn prevoius operation failure.

        2) security : implement stong identity policy
                      enable tracebility
                      apply security at all layer
                      automate security best practices
                      protect data in transit and at rest
                      keep people away from data

        3) reliability: automate failure recorvery
                        test recovery procedures
                        scales horizontally to increase aggregate availibility
                        stop guessing capacity
                        manage change in automation

        4) performance: use advance technologies
                        go global in minutes
                        use serverless architecture
                        experiment more often
                        consider mechanical sympathy
        5) cost optimization: implement cloud financial management
                              adopt consumption model
                              measure overall efficiency
                              stop spending money on undifferented heavy lifting
                              analyze and attribute expanditure

        AWS well architected tool
            it is auditing tool used to acces your architecture for alignment with aws well architected framework
            it is checklist with nearby references which can generate report to share with executives and key stakeholders

        AWS architecture center:
            it is web portal that contains best practices and reference architecture for variety of different workload/application



    Amazon leadership principle:
        it is set of principle amazon used for decision making, problm solving, simple brain storming and hiring
        there 16 principle.

        1) customer obsession
        2) ownership
        3) invent and simplify
        4) are right, A lot
        5) be curious, learn
        6) hire and develop the best
        7) insist on the high standards
        8) think big
        9) bias for action
        10) frugality
        11) Earn trust
        12) Dive deep
        13) have backbone. disagree and commit
        14) Deliver results
        15) strive to be earths best employer
        16) Succes and scale and bring broad responsibiltity.


    TCO total cost ownership:
        it is finaincial estimate intended to help users to determine direct and indirect
        cost of product and services.

        tco report are useful when organization is migrating from on-premise to cloud infrastructure.


        AWS pricing calculator:
            it online free estimate tool to estimate cost of different aws services.

        AWS migration evaluator:
            it is estimat tool which calculate organization on-primise cost so that it can compare
            with aws cloud cost for aws plan migration

    AWS Support plans:
        there 4 support plans in aws

        1) basic 2) developer 3) business 4)enterprises

        basic                      developer                 business                  enterprises
        email support for         email support for
        only billing account      24 hours until reply       same as developer        same as devloper

                                  no third party support     tech support via chat,phone 24/7

                                  general guidance < 24hr       same                   same
                                  system impaired < 12hr        same                   same

                                                             production system impaired < 4hr
                                                             production system down < 1hr
                                                                                     business critical system < 15m
                                                                                     personal support team
                                                                                     tAM techinical account manager


        7 trusted advisor checks      same as basic                    all advisor checks

        0 usd                        29usd/month                100 usd/month          15000usd/month starting



    AWS consolidated billing:

        it is aws organization features where all member account bill is consolidated in master/root account
        of organization


    AWS Trusted Advisor:
        it is recommendation tool which actively monitor your aws account to provide actional recommendations across series
        of categories

        there are checks for cost optimization, security, fault tolerance(availability),performance, service limits

        7 trusted advisor checks for basic and developer:
        1) MFA on account
        2) security groups : specify port unrestricted
        3) amazon s3 buckets permissions
        4) amazon ebs public snapshot
        5) amazon rds public snapshot
        6) IAM use: discourage use of root
        7) Service Limits: all service limits checks are free


    AWS personal health dashboard:

        awa personal health dashboard provides alerts and guidance about aws events that might affect your aws resources.
        all aws customers can access personal health dashboard.

        use these alerts to get notified about aws events that can affect aws resources and follow guidance to resolved it.


    AWS Credits:
        it is equivalent usd. aws gives credits to user upn completions of task
        like participating hackathon, completing sevey

        it have expiry data

        you used it for purchasing some services but not using domain in route53


    AWS Budgets:

        using AWS budgets we can setup alerts if our budgets exceeding or approaching defined costs

        we can setup aws budget in monthly, yearly, and quarterly with customizable start and end dates

        create costs, usage and reservation budgets

        alert support ec2, rds, redshift and elasticcache support.

        first 2 budgets are,
        then budgets cost 0.60usd/month
        we can create maximum 20000 budgets

    cost allocation tags:

        it metadata we can attach to resource so that when cost and usage reports get generated we
        can analyzed it using given tag


    Billing Alarms:
        you can also create your own alarms in cloudwatch alarms to monitor spends.
        you first need to turn on the billing alerts. in cost management preferences
        the create cloudwatch alarm with billing metric.
        billing alarm is more flexible than aws budget. it used for complex budgeting.

    AWS Cost Explorer:
        it let you visualize, understand and manage costs and usage time
        you can do different aggregation and specific time range.
        default reports help you gain insights in cost and you usage time
        you can use forecating to predict future usage.



    Security:

        Defence in Depth:
            there are 7 layers of security

            1) data:
            2) application:
            3) compute:
            4) network:
            5) perimeter:
            6) identity and access:
            7) physical:

        CIA triad:
            confidentiality, integrity, availability model it is describe security principles and
            their tradeoff relationship

            1) confidentiality : it used to protect data basically using encryption
            2) integrity : it is maintaining correctness of data over its lifecycle.generally acid property databases
            3) availibility : it is maintaining data available for access whenever required.

        AWS Artifact:
            1) AWS Artifact is self service protal for on demand access to aws compliance reports


        DDOS distributed denial of service attack:
            it is overwhelming web application by sending large amount of traffic from different location


        AWS Shield
            it aws protection service managed DDOS attack
            it is protection service that safeguards application running on aws

            when you route your traffic through route53 or cloudfront you are using
            aws shield standard.

            protect you against layer 3,4,7.


        AWS shield standard free:
            protect against most common ddos attack.
            it comes with all aws services.
            access to tool and best practices to build a ddos resilient architecture.

        AWS shield advanced:
            additional protection against larger and more sophisticated attacks.
            Available on
                route53
                cloudfront
                elastic load balancing
                aws global accelerator
                elastic ip
                visibility reports on 3,4 and 7
                DDOS cost protection

            both plans can be integrate with web application firewall to protect against layer 7

        AWS Guard Duty:
            IDS/IPS: intrusion detection system/intrusion proctrection system
            A software application that detect malcious activity or policy violation

            aws guard duty is threat detection service that continously monitor for malicious or suspicious
            activity and unauthroized behaviour. it uses machine learning to analyze following logs:
                cloud trail logs
                vpc flow logs
                DNS logs

        AWS macie:
            macie is fully managed service that continously monitor s3 data access activity for anamolies
            and generates detail alerts when detect risk of unauthorized access or inadevarant data leaks.

            macie uses machine learning to analyze cloudtrail logs


        AWS VPN :
            AWS VPN let you establish secure and private tunnel from your network aws global network


            aws site to site:
                it securly connect on premise or  branch office network to vpc

            aws client VPN:
                it securly connect user's to aws or on premise network


        AWS WAF :
            AWS web application firewall used to protect your web application from most common
            web exploits

            you write rule to allow and deny traffic based on http requests content

            it is either attached to cloudfront or ALB

            it protect web application from owasp10 most dangerous attacks

        AWS HSM:
            AWS hardware security module : it is piece of hardware designed to store encryption keys
            HSM store keys in memory and never write them to disk.

